       Design for Care Compare
Nursing Home Five-Star Quality Rating
               System:

       Technical Users’ Guide




            October 2022
Table of Contents
    October 2022 Revisions                                                                     iii

          Quality Measure Rating Threshold changes                                             iii

    July 2022 Revisions                                                                        iii

          Changes to the Methodology for the Staffing Rating                                   iii

          Changes to the Methodology for the Overall Quality Rating                            iii

    April 2022 Revisions                                                                       iv

          Quality Measure Rating Threshold changes                                             iv

    January 2022 Revisions                                                                     iv

          Public Reporting of Turnover and Weekend Staffing Information on Medicare.gov Care
          Compare Website:                                                                     iv

          Changes to Exclusion Rules for Reported Staffing:                                    iv

    Introduction                                                                                1

    Methodology for Constructing Ratings                                                        2

          Health Inspection Domain                                                              2

          Staffing Domain                                                                       6

          Quality Measure Domain                                                               15

    Overall Nursing Home Rating (Composite Measure)                                            22

          Special Focus Facilities                                                             22

          Change in Nursing Home Rating                                                        22

    Appendices                                                                                 24




                                                ii
October 2022 Revisions

Quality Measure Rating Threshold changes

Effective with the October 2022 refresh, CMS is implementing the planned, regular increases to the
Quality Measure (QM) rating thresholds, increasing each rating threshold by one-half of the average
improvement in QM scores since the last time the thresholds were set. For the October 2022 refresh, the
average improvement was determined from the period of January 2022 – July 2022. The new rating
thresholds are shown in Table 5 of this document. Note that the point thresholds for individual QMs did
not change. CMS plans to implement these regular increases every six months.



July 2022 Revisions

Changes to the Methodology for the Staffing Rating

Effective with the July 2022 refresh, CMS revised the methodology for calculating the Staffing star
rating. The new rating is based on six separate staffing measures. Similar to the Quality Measure (QM)
rating, points are assigned based on the performance on each of these six measures. The points are then
summed and the total staffing score is compared to staffing rating point thresholds to assign a rating of
one to five stars. The six measures are as follows:
     • Case-mix adjusted total nurse (RN, LPN/LVN, aide) staffing levels (hours per resident per day)
     • Case-mix adjusted RN staffing levels (hours per resident per day)
     • Case-mix adjusted total nurse (RN, LPN/LVN, aide) staffing levels (hours per resident per day)
         on the weekend
     • Total nurse turnover, defined as the percentage of nursing staff that left the nursing home over a
         twelve-month period
     • Registered Nurse (RN) turnover, defined as the percentage of RN staff that left the nursing home
         over a twelve-month period
     • Administrator turnover, defined as the number of administrators who left the nursing home over a
         twelve-month period.
Details on the definition of each of these measures and how the staffing rating is calculated based on
facility performance on these measures are provided in the Staffing Domain section of this document.


Changes to the Methodology for the Overall Quality Rating

Effective with the July 2022 refresh, CMS revised the methodology for assigning the overall quality star
rating. Previously, facilities that obtained a four- or five-star staffing rating, received an additional star in
their overall star rating. Effective July 2022, only nursing homes with a five-star staffing rating will get an
increase in their overall star rating. The full methodology for assigning the overall quality star rating
based on the health inspection rating, the staffing rating and the QM rating is described in the Overall
Nursing Home Rating section of this document.

                                                       iii
April 2022 Revisions

Quality Measure Rating Threshold changes

Effective with the April 2022 refresh, CMS implemented the planned, regular increases to the Quality
Measure (QM) rating thresholds, increasing each rating threshold by one-half of the average improvement
in QM scores since the last time the thresholds were set. For the April 2022 refresh, the average
improvement was determined from the period of April 2019 – January 2022. The new rating thresholds
are shown in Table 5 of this document. Note that the point thresholds for individual QMs did not change.



January 2022 Revisions

Public Reporting of Turnover and Weekend Staffing Information on Medicare.gov
Care Compare Website:

Effective with the January 2022 refresh, CMS began posting the following information for each nursing
home on the Medicare.gov Care Compare website:
Weekend Staffing: The level of total nurse and registered nurse (RN) staffing on weekends (Saturdays
and Sundays) provided by each nursing home over a quarter.

Staff Turnover: The percentage of nursing staff and number of administrators that stopped working at the
nursing home over a 12-month period.


Changes to Exclusion Rules for Reported Staffing:

Effective with the January 2022 refresh, several changes were made to the exclusion rules for the total
nursing and RN hours per resident day measures. These changes do not affect many nursing homes and
were made to allow staffing levels and staffing ratings to be reported for more nursing homes.




                                                    iv
Introduction
In December 2008, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) enhanced its Nursing Home
Compare 1 public reporting site to include a set of quality ratings for each nursing home that participates
in Medicare or Medicaid. The ratings take the form of several “star” ratings for each nursing home. The
primary goal of this rating system is to provide residents and their families with an easy way to
understand assessment of nursing home quality, making meaningful distinctions between high and low
performing nursing homes.

This document provides a comprehensive description of the design for the Nursing Home Five-Star
Quality Rating System. This design was developed by CMS with assistance from Abt Associates,
invaluable advice from leading researchers in the long-term care field who comprise the Technical Expert
Panel (TEP) for this project, and numerous ideas contributed by consumer and provider groups. All of
these organizations and groups have continued to contribute their input as the rating system has been
refined and updated to incorporate newly available data. We believe the rating system offers valuable and
comprehensible information to consumers based on the best data available. It features an Overall Quality
Rating of one to five stars based on nursing home performance on three domains, each of which has its
own rating:

        •   Health Inspections - Measures based on outcomes from state health inspections: Ratings
            for the health inspections domain are based on the number, scope, and severity of deficiencies
            identified during the three most recent annual inspection surveys, as well as substantiated
            findings from the most recent 36 months of complaint investigations and focused infection
            control surveys. All deficiency findings are weighted by scope and severity. The health
            inspections rating also takes into account the number of revisits required to ensure that
            deficiencies identified during health inspection surveys have been corrected.
        •   Staffing - Measures based on nursing home staffing levels and staff turnover: Ratings for
            the staffing domain are based on six measures. This includes three nurse staffing level
            measures (hours per resident per day) and three measures of staff turnover. The staffing
            measures are derived from data submitted each quarter through the Payroll-Based Journal
            (PBJ) System, along with daily resident census derived from Minimum Data Set, Version 3.0
            (MDS 3.0) assessments. The nurse staffing level measures are case-mix adjusted based on the
            distribution of MDS 3.0 assessments by Resource Utilization Groups, version IV (RUG-IV
            groups) and cover a single quarter. The turnover measures use six consecutive quarters of
            PBJ data to define annual turnover for nursing staff and administrators.
        •   Quality Measures - Measures based on MDS and claims-based quality measures (QMs):
            Ratings for the quality measures are based on performance on 15 of the QMs that are
            currently posted on the Care Compare website. These include nine long-stay measures and
            six short-stay measures. Note that not all the quality measures that are reported on Care




1
    Nursing Home Compare was retired on December 1, 2020 and replaced with Care Compare, which can be
    accessed at https://www.medicare.gov/care-compare/.

                                                      1
            Compare are included in the rating calculations. In addition to an overall quality measure
            rating, separate QM ratings for short-stay measures and long-stay measures are also reported.

In recognition of the multi-dimensional nature of nursing home quality, Care Compare displays ratings
for each of these domains along with an overall rating.

A companion document to this Technical Users’ Guide (Nursing Home Compare–Five Star Quality
Rating System: Technical Users’ Guide–State-Level Cut Point Tables) provides the data for the state-
level cut points for the health inspection star ratings. The data table in the companion document is
updated monthly. The cut points for the staffing rating are listed in Table 3 of this Technical Users’
Guide, and the cut points for the individual staffing measures included in the staffing rating are in
Appendix Table A2. Table 5 provides the cut points for the QM ratings, and the cut points for the
individual QMs are in Appendix Table A3.



Methodology for Constructing Ratings

Health Inspection Domain

Nursing homes that participate in the Medicare and/or Medicaid programs have an onsite recertification
(standard) “comprehensive” inspection annually on average, with very rarely more than fifteen months
elapsing between inspections for any one particular nursing home. Inspections are unannounced and are
conducted by a team of health care professionals who spend several days in the nursing home to assess
whether the nursing home is in compliance with federal requirements. These inspections provide a
comprehensive assessment of the nursing home, reviewing facility practice and policies in such areas as
resident rights, quality of life, medication management, skin care, resident assessment, nursing home
administration, environment, and kitchen/food services. The methodology for constructing the health
inspection rating is based on the three most recent recertification surveys for each nursing home,
complaint deficiencies during the most recent three-year period, deficiencies cited on focused infection
control surveys in the most recent three-year period, and any repeat revisits needed to verify that required
corrections have brought the facility back into compliance. The Five-Star Quality Rating System uses
nearly 400,000 records for the health inspection domain alone.

Scoring Rules
CMS calculates a health inspection score based on points assigned to deficiencies identified in each active
provider’s three most recent recertification health inspections, as well as on deficiency findings from the
most recent three years of complaint inspections and findings from focused infection control surveys.

    •   Health Inspection Results: Points are assigned to individual health deficiencies according to their
        scope and severity –more serious, widespread deficiencies receive more points, with additional
        points assigned for substandard quality of care (see Table 1). If the status of the deficiency is
        “past non-compliance” and the severity is “immediate jeopardy” (i.e., J-, K- or L-level), then
        points associated with a G- level deficiency are assigned. Two types of health citations – F731
        (Waiver of requirement to provide licensed nurses on a 24-hour basis) and F884 (COVID-19
        reporting to the Centers for Disease Control) -- are not considered in the health inspection score
        calculation (nor are these reported on Nursing Home Care Compare). Additionally, other health
        citations with a deficiency status code indicating that a waiver has been granted, while displayed

                                                     2
             on the website, are not included in the health inspection score. Deficiencies from Life Safety
             surveys are not included in the Five-Star rating calculations. Deficiencies from Federal
             Comparative Surveys are not reported on Care Compare or included in rating calculations,
             though the results of State Survey Agency determinations made during a Federal Oversight
             Survey are included.

        •    Repeat Revisits - Number of repeat revisits required to confirm that correction of deficiencies
             have restored compliance: No points are assigned for the first revisit; points are assigned only for
             the second, third, and fourth revisits and are proportional to the health inspection score for the
             survey cycle (Table 2). If a provider fails to correct deficiencies by the time of the first revisit,
             then these additional revisit points are assigned up to 85 percent of the health inspection score for
             the fourth revisit. CMS’ experience is that providers who fail to demonstrate restored compliance
             with safety and quality of care requirements during the first revisit have lower quality of care than
             other nursing homes. More revisits are associated with more serious quality problems.

Table 1
Health Inspection Score: Weights for Different Types of Deficiencies
                                                                                          Scope
 Severity
                                                                 Isolated           Pattern                 Widespread
 Immediate jeopardy to resident health or safety                 J                  K                       L
                                                                 50 points*         100 points*             150 points*
                                                                 (75 points)        (125 points)            (175 points)
 Actual harm that is not immediate jeopardy                      G                  H                       I
                                                                 20 points          35 points               45 points
                                                                                    (40 points)             (50 points)
 No actual harm with potential for more than minimal harm        D                  E                       F
 that is not immediate jeopardy                                  4 points           8 points                16 points
                                                                                                            (20 points)
 No actual harm with potential for minimal harm                  A                  B                       C
                                                                 0 point            0 points                0 points
 Note: Figures in parentheses indicate points for deficiencies that are for substandard quality of care.
 Shaded cells denote deficiency scope/severity levels that constitute substandard quality of care. See the Electronic Code
 of Federal Regulations (https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
 idx?SID=9c4d022241818fef427dc79565aba4b5&mc=true&node=pt42.5.488&rgn=div5#se42.5.488_1301) for a definition
 of substandard quality of care.
 * If the status of the deficiency is “past non-compliance” and the severity is Immediate Jeopardy, then points associated
 with a ‘G-level” deficiency (i.e., 20 points) are assigned.
 Source: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services



   Table 2
   Weights for Repeat Revisits
    Revisit Number                                   Noncompliance Points
    First                                            0
    Second                                           50 percent of health inspection score
    Third                                            70 percent of health inspection score
    Fourth                                           85 percent of health inspection score
    Note: The health inspection score includes points from deficiencies cited on the standard health inspection and
    complaint inspections during a given survey cycle.


                                                             3
CMS calculates a total weighted health inspection score for each facility (including any repeat revisits).
Note that a lower survey score corresponds to fewer deficiencies and revisits, and thus better performance
on the health inspection domain. In calculating the total weighted score, more recent standard surveys are
weighted more heavily than earlier surveys with the most recent period (rating cycle 1) being assigned a
weighting factor of 1/2, the previous period (rating cycle 2) having a weighting factor of 1/3, and the
second prior period (rating cycle 3) having a weighting factor of 1/6. The individual weighted scores for
each cycle are then summed (after including complaint surveys, focused infection control surveys, and
revisit points) to create the total weighted health inspection score for each facility.

Complaint inspections and focused infection control surveys are assigned to a time period based on the
12-month period in which the complaint or infection control survey occurred. Complaint or focused
infection control surveys that occurred within the most recent 12 months from when the data are uploaded
receive a weighting factor of 1/2; those from 13-24 months ago have a weighting factor of 1/3, and those
from 25-36 months ago have a weighting factor of 1/6. There are some deficiencies that appear on both
standard and complaint inspections. To avoid potential double-counting, deficiencies that appear on
complaint inspections that are conducted within 15 days of a recertification inspection (either prior to or
after the recertification inspection) are counted only once. If the scope or severity differs between the two
inspections, the highest scope-severity combination is used. Deficiencies cited on focused infection
control surveys are treated slightly differently. If two or more infection control inspections cite the same
deficiency within a 15-day period, all are included; however, if one or more of these deficiencies was also
cited on a recertification survey and/or a complaint inspection within the same 15-day window, only the
infection control citations are included. Points from complaint deficiencies and deficiencies cited on
infection control surveys from a given period are added to the health inspection score before calculating
revisit points, if applicable.

For facilities missing data for one period, the health inspection score is determined based on the periods
for which data are available, using the same relative weights, with the missing (third) survey weight
distributed proportionately to the existing two inspections using two survey cycles. Specifically, when
there are only two recertification inspections, the most recent survey cycle receives 60 percent weight and
the prior cycle receives 40 percent weight. Facilities with only one standard health inspection are
considered to have insufficient data to determine a health inspection rating and their rating is set to
missing for the health inspection domain. For these facilities, no overall quality rating is assigned, and no
ratings are reported for the staffing or QM domains even if data for these domains are available. Care
Compare will display “Not Available” for these facilities.

Rating Methodology
Health inspections are based on federal regulations, which surveyors implement using national
interpretive guidance and a federally specified survey process. Federal staff train state inspectors and
oversee state performance. The federal oversight includes quality checks based on a 5 percent sample of
the health inspections performed by states, in which federal inspectors either accompany state inspectors
or replicate the inspection within 60 days of the state and then compare results. These control systems are
designed to improve consistency in the survey process. Nonetheless there remains variation among states
in both inspection process and outcomes. Such variation derives from many factors, including:

        •   Survey Management: Variation among states in the skill sets of inspectors, supervision of
            inspectors, and the inspection processes;
        •   State Licensure: State licensing laws set forth different expectations for nursing homes and
            affect the interaction between state enforcement and federal enforcement (for example, a few
                                                      4
            states conduct many complaint investigations based on state licensure, and issue citations
            based on state licensure rather than on the federal regulations);
        •   Medicaid Policy: Medicaid pays for the largest proportion of long-term care in nursing
            homes. Nursing home eligibility rules, payment, and other policies in the state-administered
            Medicaid program may be associated with differences in survey outcomes.
For the above reasons, CMS bases Five-Star quality ratings in the health inspection domain on the relative
performance of facilities within a state. This approach helps control for variation among states. CMS
determines facility ratings using these criteria:

        •   The top 10 percent (with the lowest health inspection weighted scores) in each state receive a
            health inspection rating of five stars.
        •   The middle 70 percent of facilities receive a rating of two, three, or four stars, with an equal
            number (approximately 23.33 percent) in each rating category.
        •   The bottom 20 percent receive a one-star rating.

Rating thresholds are re-calibrated each month so that the distribution of star ratings within states remains
relatively constant over time. However, the rating for a given facility is held constant until there is a
change in the weighted health inspection score for that facility, regardless of changes in the statewide
distribution. Items that could change the health inspection score include the following:

        •   A new health inspection
        •   A complaint investigation or focused infection control survey that results in one or more
            deficiency citations
        •   A second, third, or fourth revisit
        •   Resolution of Informal Dispute Resolutions (IDR) or Independent Informal Dispute
            Resolutions (IIDR) resulting in changes to the scope and/or severity of deficiencies

        •   The “aging” of complaint and/or focused infection control deficiencies. Specifically, as noted
            above, findings from complaint and infection control surveys are assigned to a time period
            based on the 12-month period in which the survey occurred; thus, when a citation from a
            complaint or infection control survey ages into a different cycle, it receives less weight in the
            scoring process, resulting in a lower health inspection score and potentially a change in health
            inspection rating.

In the very rare case that a state or territory has fewer than five facilities upon which to generate the cut
points, the national distribution of health inspection scores is used. Cut points for the health inspection
ratings can be found in the Cut Point Table in the companion document to this Technical Users’ Guide:
Five Star Quality Rating System State-Level Cut Point Tables available in the ‘downloads’ section at:
https://www.cms.gov/medicare/provider-enrollment-and-
certification/certificationandcomplianc/fsqrs.html.




                                                       5
Rating Methodology for Facilities with Abuse Citation(s) To make it easier for consumers to
identify facilities with instances of non-compliance related to abuse, Care Compare includes an
icon that identifies facilities that meet either of the following criteria:
    1) Harm-level abuse citation in the most recent survey cycle: Facilities cited for abuse 2 where
       residents were found to be harmed (Scope/Severity of G or higher) on the most recent standard
       survey or on a complaint or focused infection control survey within the past 12 months.
    2) Repeat abuse citations: Facilities cited for abuse where residents were found to be potentially
       harmed (Scope/Severity of D or higher) on the most recent standard survey or on a complaint or
       focused infection control survey within the past 12 months and on the previous (i.e., second most
       recent) standard survey or on a complaint survey in the prior 12 months (i.e., from 13 to 24
       months ago).

Nursing homes that receive the abuse icon have their health inspection rating capped at a maximum of
two stars. Due to the methodology used to calculate the overall rating, the best overall rating a facility that
receives the abuse icon can have is four stars. The abuse icon (and the cap on the health inspection rating)
will be removed as of the first monthly website refresh following when a nursing home no longer meets
the abuse icon criteria.

Staffing Domain

There is considerable evidence of a relationship between nursing home staffing levels and resident
outcomes. The CMS Staffing Study 3, among other research, found a clear association between nurse
staffing ratios and nursing home quality of care. There is also a growing body of evidence on the
relationship between staff turnover and resident outcomes, with higher turnover associated with poorer
quality of care. 4

The rating for staffing is based on six measures. Detailed specifications for each of these measures is
provided below. The six measures are as follows:

    •   Case-mix adjusted total nursing hours per resident day (registered nurse (RN) + licensed practical
        nurse (LPN) + nurse aide hours) for a quarter averaged across all days (weekdays and weekends)

    •   Case-mix adjusted RN hours per resident day for a quarter, averaged across all days (weekdays
        and weekends)


2
    Note that abuse is identified as having received a deficiency of any of these tags: F600 (Protect each resident
    from all types of abuse, such as physical, mental, sexual abuse, physical punishment, and neglect by anybody);
    F602 (Protect each resident from the wrongful use of the resident's belongings or money); F603 (Protect each
    resident from separation from other residents, his/her room, or confinement to his/her room); F223 (Protect each
    resident from all abuse, physical punishment, and involuntary separation from others); and F224 (Protect each
    resident from mistreatment, neglect, and misappropriation of personal property).
3
    Kramer AM, Fish R. “The Relationship Between Nurse Staffing Levels and the Quality of Nursing Home
    Care.” Chapter 2 in Appropriateness of Minimum Nurse Staffing Ratios in Nursing Homes: Phase II Final
    Report. Abt Associates, Inc., Winter 2001.
4
    Zheng Q, Williams CS, Shulman ET, White AJ. Association between staff turnover and nursing home quality -
    evidence from payroll-based journal data. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. May 2022.
    doi:10.1111/jgs.17843

                                                         6
    •   Case-mix adjusted total nursing hours per resident day (RN + LPN + nurse aide hours) for a
        quarter averaged across all weekend days (Saturdays and Sundays)

    •   The percentage of nursing staff that left the nursing home over a twelve-month period.

    •   The percentage of RNs that left the nursing home over a twelve-month period.

    •   The number of administrators that left the nursing home over a twelve-month period.

The source for reported staffing hours is the Payroll-Based Journal (PBJ) system. 5 These data are
submitted quarterly and are due 45 days after the end of each reporting period. Only data submitted and
accepted by the deadline are used by CMS for staffing calculations and in the Five-Star Rating System.
The resident census is based on a daily resident census measure that is calculated by CMS using MDS
assessments.

Specifications for the nurse staffing level measures

The specific PBJ job codes that are used in the RN, LPN, and nurse aide hour calculations are:

        •   RN hours: Includes RN director of nursing (job code 5), registered nurses with administrative
            duties (job code 6), and registered nurses (job code 7).
        •   LPN hours: Includes licensed practical/licensed vocational nurses with administrative duties
            (job code 8) and licensed practical/vocational nurses (job code 9)
        •   Nurse aide hours: Includes certified nurse aides (job code 10), aides in training (job code 11),
            and medication aides/technicians (job code 12)

Note that the PBJ staffing data include both facility employees (full-time and part-time) and individuals
under an organization (agency) contract or an individual contract. The PBJ staffing data do not include
“private duty” nursing staff reimbursed by a resident or his/her family. Also not included are hospice staff
and feeding assistants.

The daily resident census, used in the denominator of the reported nurse staffing ratios, is derived
from MDS resident assessments and is calculated as follows:

    1. Identify the reporting period (quarter) for which the census will be calculated (e.g., CY 2021 Q2:
       April 1–June 30, 2021).

    2. Extract MDS assessment data for all residents of a facility beginning one year prior to the
       reporting period to identify all residents that may reside in the facility (i.e., any resident with an
       MDS assessment may still reside in the facility). For example, for the CY 2021 Q2 reporting
       period, extract MDS data from April 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021.

    3. Identify discharged/deceased residents using the following criteria:
            a) If a resident has an MDS Discharge assessment or Death in Facility tracking record, use
               the date reported on that assessment and assume that the resident no longer resides in the
               facility as of the date of discharge/death on the last assessment. In the case of discharges,

5
    More detailed information about the PBJ system is available at: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-
    Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/NursingHomeQualityInits/Staffing-Data-Submission-PBJ.html

                                                       7
                if there is a subsequent admission assessment, then assume that the resident re-entered the
                nursing home on the entry date indicated on the entry assessment.
            b) For any resident with an interval of 150 days or more with no assessments, assume the
               resident no longer resides in the facility as of the 150th day from the last assessment.
               (This assumption is based on the requirement for facilities to complete MDS assessments
               on all residents at least quarterly). If no assessment is present, assume the resident was
               discharged, but the facility did not transmit a Discharge assessment.

For any particular date, residents whose assessments do not meet the criteria in #3 above prior to that date
are assumed to reside in the facility. The count of these residents is the census for that particular day.

MDS assessments for a given resident are linked using the Resident Internal ID. The Resident Internal ID
is a unique number, assigned by the Quality Improvement Evaluation System (QIES) Assessment
Submission and Processing (ASAP) system, which identifies a resident. The combination of state and
Resident Internal ID uniquely identifies a resident in the national repository. The process by which the
Resident Internal ID is created is described by the MDS 3.0 Provider User’s Guide - Appendix B
(https://qtso.cms.gov/system/files/qtso/Users_AppB.pdf ). The following MDS items are used to define
the Resident Internal ID:

        •   State ID
        •   Facility Internal ID (QIES ASAP system number)
        •   Social Security Number (SSN)
        •   Last Name
        •   First Name
        •   Date of Birth
        •   Gender

Therefore, in order to achieve an accurate census, it is imperative that, in addition to having complete
assessment data for each resident including Discharge assessment data, residents are assigned correct
Resident Internal IDs. To facilitate this, providers must ensure that MDS items, in particular the items
indicated above, are entered correctly on each assessment. Providers must also carefully monitor the Final
Validation Report, generated upon MDS submission, for any errors. Providers should work with their
State RAI Coordinator or State Automation Coordinator to correct any errors that arise during assessment
submission. In addition to using their Final Validation Report to validate the file structure and data
content of each successful MDS submission, providers can monitor their MDS data using additional
Certification and Survey Provider Enhanced Reports (CASPER) Reports. There are CASPER Reports for
MDS Census Summary (returns resident count per day), MDS Census Detail (returns list of Resident
Internal IDs counted per day), Admissions, Discharges, Duplicate Residents, Errors, and Daily Rosters,
among others. Full descriptions of these reports are available in Section 6 of the CASPER Reporting
MDS Provider User’s Guide available at the following link: https://qtso.cms.gov/system/files/2018-
03/cspr_sec6_mds_prvdr.pdf. Information about Final Validation Reports and error messages in the
reports is available in Sections 4 and 5 of the MDS 3.0 Provider User's Guide
(https://qtso.cms.gov/reference-and-manuals/mds-30-provider-users-guide).

The nurse staffing hours reported through PBJ and the daily MDS census are both aggregated (summed)
across the quarterly reporting period. The quarterly reported nurse staffing hours per resident day are then
                                                     8
calculated by dividing the aggregate reported hours by the aggregate resident census. Only days that have
at least one resident are included in the calculations. Total nurse staffing on the weekends is similarly
calculated with both the numerator (reported nurse staffing hours) and the denominator (resident census)
aggregated (summed) across all weekend days (Saturdays and Sundays) in the quarterly reporting period.

CMS uses a set of exclusion criteria to identify facilities with highly improbable PBJ staffing data and
nurse staffing levels are not reported for these facilities (“Not Available” is displayed on the Care
Compare website). Some of these nursing homes will also not receive a staffing rating; however, some
will receive a one-star staffing rating due to scoring exceptions. The exclusion criteria are as follows:

         •   Total nurse staffing (job codes 5-12), aggregated over all days in the quarter with at least one
             resident, is zero (0 hours per resident per day). 6
         •   Total nurse staffing (job codes 5-12), aggregated over all weekend days in the quarter with at
             least one resident, is zero (0 hours per resident per day).
         •   Total nurse staffing (job codes 5-12), aggregated over all days in the quarter with at least one
             resident, is excessively high (>12 hours per resident day).
         •   Total nurse staffing (job codes 5-12), aggregated over all weekend days in the quarter with at
             least one resident, is excessively high (>12 hours per resident day).
         •   Nurse aide staffing (job codes 10-12), aggregated over all days in the quarter with at least one
             resident, is excessively high (>5.25 hours per resident day).

         •   Nurse aide staffing (job codes 10-12), aggregated over all weekend days in the quarter with at
             least one resident, is excessively high (>5.25 hours per resident day).

Case-Mix Adjustment
CMS adjusts the reported staffing ratios for case-mix, using the Resource Utilization Group (RUG-IV)
case-mix system. The CMS Staff Time Resource Intensity Verification (STRIVE) Study measured the
average number of RN, LPN, and nurse aide minutes associated with each RUG-IV group (using the 66
group version of RUG-IV). These are referred to as “case-mix hours”. 7

CMS calculates case-mix adjusted hours per resident day for each facility for each staff type using this
formula:

                     Hours Adjusted = (Hours Reported/Hours Case-Mix) * Hours National Average

The reported hours are those reported by the facility through PBJ as described above. National average
hours for a given staff type represent the national mean of case-mix hours across all facilities active on the
last day of the quarter that submitted valid nurse staffing data for the quarter. The National Average
Hours are updated every quarter and will be available in the State US Averages table in the Provider Data
Catalog on CMS.gov (https://data.cms.gov/provider-data/ ).




6
    Note that, prior to January 2022, nursing homes with total nurse staffing < 1.5 hours per resident day were
    excluded.
7
    Note that the term “case-mix hours” replaces the term “expected hours” that was used prior to April 2019.

                                                          9
The case-mix values for each nursing home are based on the daily distribution of residents by RUG-IV
group in the quarter covered by the PBJ reported staffing and estimates of daily RN, LPN, and nurse aide
hours from the CMS STRIVE Study (see Table A1). Specifically, case-mix nurse staffing hours per
resident day for a given nursing home are calculated as follows:

    1) The MDS is used to assign a RUG-IV group to each resident for each day in the quarter. The
       method is similar to that used for calculating the daily MDS census and is described below.
    2) This information is aggregated to generate a count of residents in each of the 66 RUG-IV groups
       in the nursing home for each day in the quarter. RUG-IV groups that are not represented on a
       given day are assigned a count of zero. Residents for whom there is insufficient MDS information
       to assign a RUG-IV category are not included.
    3) Based on the number of residents in each RUG-IV group, case-mix total nursing and RN hours
       are calculated by multiplying by nursing time estimates for each RUG-IV group from the
       STRIVE study (Table A1).
    4) Aggregate case-mix nursing and RN hours for the quarter are calculated by summing across all
       days and RUG-IV groups. These are the numerators in the calculations of case-mix total nursing
       and RN hours per resident day. The denominator for these calculations is the count of the total
       number of resident-days in the quarter for which there is a valid RUG-IV group.
    5) Case-mix total nursing and RN hours per resident day for each nursing home are calculated by
       dividing aggregate case-mix hours (total nursing or RN) by the number of resident-days. Due to
       an extremely high correlation (>0.99) between facility case-mix values on the weekends and that
       calculated for all days in the quarter, the case-mix value for all days in the quarter is used for
       calculating the case-mix adjusted total nurse staffing on the weekends.

To determine the number of residents in each RUG-IV grouping for each day of the quarter for each
nursing home, the same algorithm is used as that used to generate the daily MDS census (with slight
adjustment to count RUG-IV groupings specifically, instead of just counting residents):

    1) Identify the reporting period (quarter) for which the RUG groupings will be collected (e.g., CY
       2021 Q2: April 1–June 30, 2021).
    2) Extract MDS assessment data (including RUG-IV 66 Hierarchical group) for all residents of a
       facility beginning one year prior to the reporting period to identify all residents that may reside in
       the nursing home (i.e., any resident with an MDS assessment may still reside in the nursing
       home). For example, for the CY 2021 Q2 reporting period, MDS data from April 1, 2020 through
       June 30, 2021 were extracted.
    3) Identify discharged/deceased residents using the following criteria:
        a) If a resident has an MDS Discharge assessment or Death in Facility tracking record, use the
           date reported on that assessment and assume that the resident no longer resides in the nursing
           home as of the date of discharge/death on the last assessment. In the case of discharges, if
           there is a subsequent admission assessment, then assume that the resident re-entered the
           nursing home on the entry date indicated on the admission assessment.
        b) For any resident with an interval of 150 days or more with no MDS assessments, assume the
           resident no longer resides in the nursing home as of the 150th day from the last assessment.
           (This assumption is based on the requirement for facilities to complete MDS assessments on
           all residents at least quarterly). If no assessment is present, it is assumed the resident was
           discharged, but the nursing home did not transmit a Discharge assessment.



                                                     10
For any particular date, residents whose assessments do not meet the criteria in #3 above prior to that date
are assumed to reside in the nursing home. The RUG IV 66 Hierarchical group assigned to those residents
on their most recent assessments as of that date are used to determine the RUG-IV distribution for that
nursing home on that date. The calculations of “case-mix”, “reported”, and “national average” hours are
made separately for RNs and for all nursing staff (both for the full week and for weekends). Adjusted
hours are also calculated for both groups using the formula provided earlier in this section.

A downloadable file that contains the “case-mix”, “reported” and “adjusted" hours used in the staffing
calculations is included in the nursing home provider information data table available in the Provider Data
Catalog on CMS.gov (https://data.cms.gov/provider-data/).

Specifications for Staff Turnover Measures

Three staff turnover measures are reported on the Care Compare website and included in the staffing
rating: total nurse, registered nurse (RN), and nursing home administrator turnover.
The turnover measures are derived based on data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) Payroll-Based Journal (PBJ) System. Using data submitted through PBJ, annual turnover
measures for RNs, total nurses (RNs, licensed practical/licensed vocational nurses (LPNs), and nurse
aides), and nursing home administrators are constructed. The PBJ job codes included in turnover
measures for RNs and total nurses are consistent with those used for the staffing level measures reported
on the Medicare.gov Care Compare website. Specifically, below are the definitions that are used for the
staff types included in the turnover measures:
    •   RNs: Includes RN director of nursing (job code 5), RNs with administrative duties (job code 6),
        and RNs (job code 7)

    •   Total Nurses: Includes RN director of nursing (job code 5), RNs with administrative duties (job
        code 6), RNs (job code 7), LPNs with administrative duties (job code 8), LPNs (job code 9),
        certified nurse aides (job code 10), aides in training (job code 11), and medication
        aides/technicians (job code 12)

    •   Nursing home administrators (job code 1)


Note that the calculation of the annual turnover measures requires six consecutive quarters of PBJ data
(See Figure 1). Data from a baseline quarter (prior to the first quarter covered by the turnover measures)
along with the first two quarters covered by the turnover measures are used for identifying employees
who are eligible to be included in the turnover measure. Data from the quarter after the four-quarter
period covered by the turnover measures are used to identify the gaps in days worked in the last 60 days
of the fourth quarter used for the turnover measure.




                                                    11
        Figure 1: Time Period Used for Calculating Turnover Measures




Staff turnover measures are constructed using the daily staffing information submitted through the PBJ
system. Turnover is identified based on gaps in days worked, allowing the creation of a turnover measure
that is defined the same way across all nursing homes and that does not depend on termination dates
reported by nursing homes. Individuals are identified based on the employee system ID and nursing home
identifiers in the PBJ data.

    •   Denominator: The turnover measures include only individuals who work at least 120 hours in a
        90-day period across the baseline quarter (the quarter prior to the first quarter used in the turnover
        calculation) and the first two quarters used in the turnover calculation. For example, the turnover
        calculation for calendar year 2021 includes in the denominator, individuals who worked 120 or
        more hours in any 90-day period with the first workday of the 90-day period occurring in
        2020Q4-2021Q2 (October 1, 2020 through June 30, 2021). This specification excludes
        individuals who work infrequently (e.g., occasionally covering shifts at a nursing home). Note
        that both regular employees and agency staff are included in the turnover measure if they work
        sufficient hours to be eligible for the denominator.

    •   Numerator: Individuals who no longer work at the nursing home are defined as eligible
        individuals who have a period of at least 60 consecutive days in which they do not work at all.
        The 60-day gap must start during the period covered by the turnover measure. This lengthy period
        without any reported work hours suggests that the individual is no longer working at the nursing
        home. For example, the numerator for turnover in 2021 includes eligible employees who had a
        60-day gap that started anytime during the year. The turnover date is defined as the last workday
        prior to the start of the 60-day gap. Note that data from the quarter after the period covered by the
        turnover measure are required to identify gaps that start within 60 days of the end of the period
        covered by the turnover measure. For example, data from 2022Q1 are used to identify 60-day
        gaps that started between November 2, 2021 and December 31, 2021.

Note that individuals who return to the nursing home after a gap of more than 60 days can have multiple
‘employment spells’ used in the turnover calculation if they meet the eligibility requirement for
subsequent employment spell(s). Essentially, they are treated as new employees.

    •   Exclusions: Several types of nursing-home level exclusion criteria are applied:
                                                     12
            o   Nursing homes that failed to submit staffing data or submitted data that are considered
                invalid (using the current exclusion rules for the staffing domain) for one or more of the
                quarters used to calculate the turnover measures are excluded (see staffing domain
                section above for more details). Turnover measures will not be reported or used in the
                staffing rating until the quarter(s) with missing or invalid data are no longer included in
                the turnover measure calculation period (six quarters). Additionally, if a nursing home
                has no resident census information (derived from MDS assessments and needed for the
                calculation of staffing levels), the nursing home is excluded. These are the same
                exclusion rules used for the nurse staffing measures described above. Additionally,
                nursing homes that failed an audit of the PBJ staffing data for one of the covered quarters
                are excluded.

            o   Nursing homes are excluded from the total nurse staffing and RN turnover measures if
                they have fewer than five eligible nurses (RNs, LPNs, and nurse aides) in the
                denominator. The purpose of this exclusion rule is to increase the stability of the turnover
                measures. Note that for the nursing home administrator turnover measure, the minimum
                requirement is one eligible administrator since most nursing homes have only one nursing
                home administrator.

            o   For the total nurse staffing and RN turnover measures, nursing homes with 100 percent
                daily total nurse staffing turnover for any day in the six quarter period on which there
                were at least five eligible nurse staff are excluded. 100 percent daily turnover is typically
                the result of changes in the employee IDs used by nursing homes. Since gaps in days
                worked are identified based on the employee and nursing home IDs reported in the PBJ
                data, a change in employee IDs can result in a 100 percent turnover rate on a particular
                day (i.e., the day that the nursing home started using the new identifier), which reflects
                the change in the employee IDs and not actual staff turnover.

            o   For the administrator turnover measure, nursing homes that submitted no administrator
                data for one or more of the six required quarters are excluded.

            o   For the administrator turnover measure, nursing homes that submitted PBJ data
                suggesting an erroneously high number of administrators are excluded. Specifically, if a
                nursing home reports administrator hours (job code 1) for five or more individuals (based
                on employee IDs) on 12 or more days during the three-quarter denominator eligibility
                period, the administrator turnover measure will be excluded.

    •   Turnover calculation: Annual turnover measures are constructed. For the total nurse and RN
        turnover measures, the annual turnover percentage is calculated using this formula:

(Total number of employment spells that ended in turnover)/(Total number of eligible employment spells)

        Using this specification, the maximum turnover rate is 100 percent.

Nursing home administrator turnover is measured as the total number of administrators that left the
nursing home during the period covered by the turnover measures.


                                                     13
Scoring Rules for the Staffing Measures
Points are assigned to each of the six staffing measures. For five of the measures (all except administrator
turnover), the points are determined based on deciles. For the staffing level measures, more points are
assigned for higher case-mix adjusted staffing levels. For the turnover measures, more points are assigned
for lower turnover. Weights for the measures (maximum possible points) are as follows:

    •   For case-mix adjusted total nurse staffing and case-mix adjusted RN staffing, a maximum of
        100 points is assigned. Nursing homes are grouped into deciles based on the national distribution of
        each measure. Nursing homes in the lowest decile receive 10 points. Points are increased in 10-
        point increments so that nursing homes in the highest decile receive 100 points.

    •   For case-mix adjusted total nurse staffing on the weekends, a maximum of 50 points is assigned.
        Nursing homes are grouped into deciles based on the national distribution of each measure.
        Nursing homes in the lowest decile receive 5 points. Points are increased in 5-point increments so
        that nursing homes in the highest decile receive 50 points.

    •   For total nurse turnover and RN turnover, a maximum of 50 points is assigned. Nursing homes
        are grouped into deciles based on the national distribution of each measure. Nursing homes in the
        decile with the highest turnover receive 5 points. Points are increased in 5-point increments so that
        nursing homes in the decile with the lowest turnover receive 50 points.

    •   For administrator turnover, a maximum of 30 points is assigned. Nursing homes with no
        administrator departures during the measurement period receive 30 points; nursing homes with one
        administrator departure receive 25 points; and nursing homes with two or more administrator
        departures during the annual measurement period receive 10 points.

The cut points for each of the staffing measures are based on the national distribution of the measures
including data through the first calendar quarter of 2022. These cut points are listed in Appendix Table A2.

Rating Methodology
Once points are assigned for each of the six staffing measures, these points are summed to provide a total
staffing score for each nursing home. There is a maximum of 380 possible points. No staffing rating is
assigned to nursing homes with reported nurse staffing levels for the quarter that are considered invalid
according to the staffing level exclusion rules described previously. However, if a nursing home has valid
data for the nurse staffing level measures but is missing one or more of the turnover measures, a rating will
be assigned based on the staffing level measures and any available turnover measures. These nursing homes
will have a maximum possible score of less than 380 points; thus, their staffing score is rescaled according
to the following formula:

Total staffing points for available measures X (380/maximum possible points based on available measures)

Note that this formula rescales a nursing home’s score so that the rescaled score has a maximum of 380
points and is equivalent to assigning the nursing home’s average points on the available measures to the
measures that are missing. After any necessary rescaling, the staffing rating is assigned based on the point
thresholds shown in Table 3.




                                                      14
Table 3
Point Ranges for the Staffing Rating (maximum possible score = 380 points)
        1 star                2 stars                 3 stars                4 stars                 5 stars

        < 155                155 - 204               205 - 254              255 - 319               320 - 380

Note: These cut points are applied after any necessary rescaling of the staffing score to have a maximum possible
value of 380 points. The rescaled score is rounded to the nearest integer. Cut points for each of the six measures
that contribute to the total staffing Score are shown in Appendix Table A2.



Scoring Exceptions
The following are exceptions to the scoring rules (described previously) for assigning the staffing rating:

        •   Providers that fail to submit any staffing data by the required deadline will receive a one-star
            staffing rating for the quarter.
        •   Providers that submit staffing data indicating that there were four or more days in the quarter
            with no RN staffing hours (job codes 5-7) on days when there were one or more residents in
            the nursing home will receive a one-star staffing rating for the quarter.
        •   CMS conducts audits of nursing homes to verify the data submitted and to ensure accuracy.
            Facilities that fail to respond to these audits and those for which the audit identifies
            significant discrepancies between the hours reported and the hours verified will receive a one-
            star staffing rating for three months from the time at which the deadline to respond to audit
            requests passes or discrepancies are identified. If repeat audits identify the same discrepancy,
            the timeframe for the staffing rating downgrade may be extended.

Quality Measure Domain

A set of quality measures (QMs) has been developed from Minimum Data Set (MDS) and Medicare
claims data to describe the quality of care provided in nursing homes. These measures address a broad
range of function and health status indicators. Most nursing homes will have three QM ratings–an overall
QM rating, a long-stay QM rating, and a short-stay QM rating. For nursing homes that have only long-
stay or only short-stay QMs, the overall QM rating is equal to their long-stay or short-stay QM rating.
QM ratings are based on performance on a subset of 10 MDS-based QMs and five measures that are
created using Medicare claims. These measures were selected for use in the rating system based on their
validity and reliability, the extent to which nursing home practice may affect the measures, statistical
performance, and the importance of the measures.

Measures for Long-Stay residents (defined as residents who are in the nursing home for greater than 100
days) that are derived from MDS assessments:

    •   Percentage of long-stay residents whose need for help with daily activities has increased
    •   Percentage of long-stay residents whose ability to move independently worsened
    •   Percentage of long-stay high-risk residents with pressure ulcers
    •   Percentage of long-stay residents who have or had a catheter inserted and left in their bladder
    •   Percentage of long-stay residents with a urinary tract infection

                                                        15
    •   Percentage of long-stay residents experiencing one or more falls with major injury
    •   Percentage of long-stay residents who got an antipsychotic medication

Measures for Long-Stay residents that are derived from claims data:

    •   Number of hospitalizations per 1,000 long-stay resident days

    •   Number of outpatient emergency department (ED) visits per 1,000 long-stay resident days

Measures for Short-Stay residents that are derived from MDS assessments:

    •   Percentage of short-stay residents who improved in their ability to move around on their own
    •   Percentage of Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) residents with pressure ulcers/pressure injuries that
        are new or worsened
    •   Percentage of short-stay residents who got antipsychotic medication for the first time
Measures for Short-Stay residents that are derived from claims data:

    •   Percentage of short-stay residents who were re-hospitalized after a nursing home admission
        •   Percentage of short-stay residents who have had an outpatient emergency department (ED)
            visit
        •   Rate of successful return to home and community from a SNF

Table 4 contains more detailed information on these measures. Technical specifications for all of the
measures are available in the downloads section at https://www.cms.gov/medicare/quality-initiatives-
patient-assessment-instruments/nursinghomequalityinits/nhqiqualitymeasures.html.

Values for four of the MDS-based QMs (Percentage of long-stay residents whose ability to move
independently, Percentage of long-stay residents who have or had a catheter inserted and left in their
bladder, Percentage of short-stay residents who improved in their ability to move around on their own,
Percentage of SNF residents with pressure ulcers/pressure injuries that are new or worsened) are risk
adjusted, using resident-level covariates that adjust for resident factors associated with differences in the
performance on the QM. For example, the catheter risk-adjustment model takes into account whether or
not residents had bowel incontinence or pressure sores on the prior assessment. All of the claims-based
measures are risk adjusted. Risk-adjustment for the hospitalization and ED visit measures incorporates
items from Medicare enrollment data and Part A claims and information from the first MDS assessment
associated with the nursing home stay. Risk adjustment for the rate of successful return to home and
community from a SNF measure uses data derived from Medicare enrollment data and Part A claims. The
risk-adjustment methodology is described in more detail in the technical specification documents
referenced above. CMS calculates ratings for the QM domain using the four most recent quarters for
which data are available (except the rate of successful return to home and community from a SNF that
uses a two-year period). The time period specifications were selected to increase the number of
assessments available for calculating the QM rating. This increases the stability of estimates and reduces
the amount of missing data. The adjusted four-quarter QM values for each of the MDS-based QMs used
in the five-star algorithm, except the short-stay pressure ulcer/injury measure are computed as follows:



                                                     16
Where QM Q1, QM Q2, QM Q3, and QM Q4 correspond to the adjusted QM values for the four most recent
quarters and DQ1, DQ2, and DQ3 DQ4 are the denominators (number of eligible residents for the particular
QM) for the same four quarters.

Values for the claims-based measures and the short-stay pressure ulcer/pressure injury measure are
calculated in a similar manner, except that the data used to calculate the measures use a full year (or two
years) of data rather than being broken out separately by quarter.

Table 4 Quality Measures Used in the Five-Star Quality Measure Rating Calculation
 Measure                          Comments
 MDS Long-Stay Measures
 Percentage of residents          This measure is a change measure that reports the percentage of long-stay
 whose ability to move            residents who have demonstrated a decline in independence of locomotion when
 independently worsened           comparing the target assessment to a prior assessment. Residents who lose
                                  mobility may also lose the ability to perform other activities of daily living, like
                                  eating, dressing, or getting to the bathroom.
 Percentage of residents          This measure reports the percentage of long-stay residents whose need for help
 whose need for help with         with late-loss Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) has increased when compared to
 daily activities has             the prior assessment. This is a change measure that reflects worsening
 increased                        performance on at least two late loss ADLs by one functional level or on one late
                                  loss ADL by more than one functional level compared to the prior assessment.
                                  The late loss ADLs are bed mobility, transfer, eating, and toileting. Maintenance
                                  of ADLs is related to an environment in which the resident is up and out of bed
                                  and engaged in activities. The CMS Staffing Study found that higher staffing
                                  levels were associated with lower rates of increasing ADL dependence.
 Percentage of high-risk          This measure captures the percentage of long-stay, high-risk residents with
 residents with pressure          Stage II-IV or unstageable pressure ulcers. Residents at high risk for pressure
 ulcers                           ulcers are those who are impaired in bed mobility or transfer, who are comatose,
                                  or who suffer from malnutrition.
 Percentage of residents          This measure reports the percentage of residents who have had an indwelling
 who have/had a catheter          catheter in the last seven days. Indwelling catheter use may result in
 inserted and left in their       complications, like urinary tract or blood infections, physical injury, skin problems,
 bladder                          bladder stones, or blood in the urine.
 Percentage of residents          This measure reports the percentage of long-stay residents who have had a
 with a urinary tract infection   urinary tract infection within the past 30 days. Urinary tract infections can often be
                                  prevented through hygiene and drinking enough fluid. Urinary tract infections are
                                  relatively minor but can lead to more serious problems and cause complications
                                  like delirium if not treated.
 Percentage of residents          This measure reports the percentage of long-stay residents who have
 experiencing one or more         experienced one or more falls with major injury reported in the target period or
 falls with major injury          look-back period (one full calendar year).
 Percentage of residents          This measure reports the percentage of long-stay residents who are receiving
 who got an antipsychotic         antipsychotic drugs in the target period. Reducing the rate of antipsychotic
 medication                       medication use has been the focus of several CMS initiatives.




                                                          17
Table 4 Quality Measures Used in the Five-Star Quality Measure Rating Calculation
 Measure                         Comments
 Claims-Based Long-Stay Measures
 Number of hospitalizations      This measures the number of unplanned inpatient admissions or outpatient
 per 1,000 resident days         observation stays that occurred among long-stay residents of a nursing home
                                 during a one-year period, expressed as the number of unplanned hospitalizations
                                 for every 1,000 days that the long-stay residents were admitted to the nursing
                                 home.
 Number of outpatient            This measures the number of outpatient ED visits that occurred among long-stay
 emergency department (ED)       residents of a nursing home during a one-year period, expressed as the number
 visits per 1,000 resident       of outpatient ED visits for every 1,000 days that the long-stay residents were
 days                            admitted to the nursing home.
 MDS Short-Stay Measures
 Percentage of residents         This measure assesses the percentage of short-stay residents whose
 who improved in their           independence in three mobility functions (i.e., transfer, locomotion, and walking)
 ability to move around on       increases over the course of the nursing home care episode.
 their own
 Percentage of SNF               This measure captures the percentage of short-stay residents with pressure
 residents with pressure         ulcers that are new or whose existing pressure ulcers worsened during their stay
 ulcers/pressure injuries that   in the SNF and includes unstageable ulcers.
 are new or worsened
 Percentage of residents         This measure reports the percentage of short-stay residents who are receiving an
 who antipsychotic               antipsychotic medication during the target period but not on their initial
 medication for the first time   assessment.
 Claims-Based Short-Stay Measures
 Percentage of short-stay     This measure reports the percentage of all new admissions or readmissions to a
 residents who were re-       nursing home from a hospital where the resident was re-admitted to a hospital for
 hospitalized after a nursing an inpatient or observation stay within 30 days of entry or reentry.
 home admission
 Percentage of short-stay     This measure reports the percentage of all new admissions or readmissions to a
 residents who have had an    nursing home from a hospital where the resident had an outpatient ED visit (i.e.,
 outpatient emergency         an ED visit not resulting in an inpatient hospital admission) within 30 days of
 department (ED) visit        entry or reentry.
 Rate of successful return to This measure reports the rate at which residents returned to home and
 home and community from      community with no unplanned hospitalizations and no deaths in the 31 days
 a SNF                        following discharge from the SNF.


Missing Data and Imputation
MDS-based measures are reported if the measure can be calculated for at least 20 residents’ assessments
(summed across four quarters of data to enhance measurement stability) for both the long- and short-stay
QMs. The short-stay claims-based measures are reported if the measure can be calculated for at least 20
nursing home stays over the course of the year. The long-stay claims-based measures are reported if the
measure can be calculated for at least 20 nursing home stays over the course of the year.

For facilities with missing data or an inadequate denominator size for one or more QMs meeting the
criteria described below, all available data from the nursing home are used. The remaining assessments
(or stays) are imputed to get the nursing home to the minimum required sample size of 20. Missing values
are imputed based on the statewide average for the measure. For example, if a nursing home had actual
data for 12 resident assessments, the data for those 12 assessments would be used and the remaining eight
assessments would be imputed using the state average to get to the minimum sample size required to
include the measure in the scoring for the QM rating. The imputation strategy for the missing values
depends on the pattern of missing data.

                                                        18
        •   For facilities that have an adequate denominator size for at least five of the nine long-stay
            QMs, values are imputed for the long-stay measures with fewer than 20 assessments or
            residents as described above. Points are then assigned for all nine long-stay QMs according to
            the scoring rules described below.
        •   For facilities that have an adequate denominator size for at least four of the six short-stay
            QMs, values are imputed for the short-stay measures with smaller denominators as described
            above. Points are then assigned for all six short-stay QMs according to the scoring rules
            described below.
        •   For facilities that do not have an adequate denominator size for at least five long-stay QMs
            but that have an adequate denominator size for four or more short-stay QMs, the QM rating is
            based on the short-stay measures only. Values for the missing long-stay QMs are not
            imputed. No long-stay QM rating is reported, and no long-stay measures are used in
            determining the overall QM rating.
        •   Similarly, for facilities that do not have an adequate denominator size for at least four short-
            stay QMs but that have an adequate denominator size for five or more long-stay QMs, the
            QM rating is based on the long-stay measures only. Values for the missing short-stay QMs
            are not imputed. No short-stay QM rating is reported, and no short-stay measures are used in
            determining the overall QM rating.

Note that while values are imputed according to the rules described above for the purposes of assigning
points for the QM score, data for QMs that use imputed data are not reported on the Care Compare
website nor included in the downloadable databases available at https://data.cms.gov/provider-data/. QM
values are publicly reported only for providers meeting the minimum denominator requirements prior to
any imputation. 8

Scoring Rules for the Individual QMs
Two different sets of weights are used for assigning QM points to individual QMs. Some measures have a
maximum score of 150 points while the maximum number of points for other measures is 100. The
weight for each measure was determined based on the opportunity for nursing homes to improve on the
measure and the clinical significance of the measure based on expert feedback. For measures that have a
maximum score of 150 points, the points are determined based on deciles. Quintiles are used for measures
that have a maximum score of 100 points. For all measures, points are calculated based on performance
relative to the national distribution of the measure. Points are assigned after any needed imputation of
individual QM values, with the points determined using this methodology:

        •   For long-stay ADL worsening, long-stay antipsychotic medication, long-stay mobility
            decline, the two claims-based long-stay measures, the percentage of short-stay residents who
            improved in their ability to move around on their own, and the three claims-based short-stay
            measures: nursing homes are grouped into deciles based on the national distribution of the
            QM. Nursing homes in the lowest performing decile receive 15 points for the measure. Points
            are increased in 15-point intervals for each decile so that nursing homes in the highest
            performing decile receive 150 points.


8
    Note that for the rate of successful return to home and community from a SNF, the minimum sample size for
    publicly reporting the measure is 25.

                                                      19
        •   For long-stay pressure ulcer, long-stay catheter, long-stay urinary tract infections, long-stay
            falls, short-stay pressure ulcer/pressure injury, and short-stay antipsychotic medication:
            nursing homes are grouped into quintiles based on the national distribution of the QM. The
            quintiles are assigned 20 points for the lowest performing quintile, 100 points for the highest
            performing quintile, and 40, 60 or 80 points for the second, third and fourth quintiles
            respectively.
        •   For two 100-point measures that have more than 20 percent of nursing homes with a QM
            value of 0 (short-stay pressure ulcers/injuries and short-stay antipsychotic measures), all
            nursing homes with a QM value of 0 are awarded 100 points, and the remaining nursing
            homes are divided to maintain as close to even quintiles as possible.
Note that, for all of the measures, the groupings are based on the national distribution of the QMs, prior to
any imputation. For most of the MDS-derived QMs, the cut points are based on the QM distributions
averaged across the four quarters from Quarter 4 of 2017 to Quarter 3 of 2018. For short-stay pressure
ulcers/pressure injuries, the cut points are based on the national distribution of the measure calculated for
the period of Quarter 1 2019 through Quarter 4 2019. For the rate of successful return to home and
community from a SNF measure, the cut points are based on the national distribution of the measure
calculated for the period Quarter 4 of 2016 through Quarter 3 of 2017. For the other four claims-based
QMs (except rate of successful return to home and community from a SNF), the cut points are based on
the national distribution of the measures calculated for the period of Quarter 4 of 2017 through Quarter 3
of 2018. The points associated with each individual QM are listed in Appendix Table A2.

Quality Measures with a maximum score of 150 points:
Long-stay
Percentage of residents whose need for help with daily activities increased
Percentage of residents who received an antipsychotic medication
Percentage of residents whose ability to move independently worsened
Number of hospitalizations per 1,000 resident days
Number of outpatient emergency department (ED) visits per 1,000 resident days
Short-stay
Percentage of residents who improved in their ability to move around on their own
Rate of successful return to home and community from a SNF
Percentage of short-stay residents who were re-hospitalized after a nursing home admission
Percentage of short-stay residents who have had an outpatient emergency department (ED) visit
Quality Measures with maximum score of 100 points:
Long-stay
Percentage of residents experiencing one or more falls with major injury
Percentage of high-risk residents with pressure ulcers
Percentage of residents with a urinary tract infection
Percentage of residents who have or had a catheter inserted and left in their bladder
Short-stay
Percentage of residents who got an antipsychotic medication for the first time
Percentage of SNF residents with pressure ulcers/pressure injuries that are new or worsened
Rating Methodology
After any needed imputation for individual QMs, points are summed across all of the long-stay QMs, all
of short-stay QMs, as well as across all QMs based upon the scoring rules described above to create a
                                                     20
long-stay QM score, a short-stay QM score, and a total QM score for each nursing home. The long-stay
QM score ranges between 155 and 1,150. Due to differences in number of measures and weights, the
unadjusted short-stay QM score has a maximum of 800 points. So that the long- and short-stay measures
can count equally in the calculation of the total QM score, an adjustment factor of 1,150/800 is applied to
the unadjusted total short-stay score. After applying this adjustment, the adjusted short-stay score ranges
from 144 to 1,150 9. The total overall QM score, which sums the total long-stay score and the total
adjusted short-stay score, ranges between 299 and 2,300.

Facilities that receive an overall QM rating are in one of the following categories:

        •   They have points for all of the QMs.
        •   They have points for only the nine long-stay QMs (long-stay facilities).
        •   They have points for only the six short-stay QMs (short-stay facilities).
        •   They do not have sufficient data for either the long-stay or the short-stay QMs. No QM
            ratings are generated for these nursing homes.

Once the long-stay, short-stay, and overall QM scores are computed for each nursing home as described
above, a long-stay QM rating is assigned to nursing homes that have long-stay QM scores; a short-stay
QM rating is assigned to nursing homes that have short-stay QM scores, and an overall QM star rating is
assigned using the methodology previously described using the point thresholds shown in Table 5. CMS
plans to raise these thresholds every six months by 50% of the increase in scores over that time period.

            Table 5
            Point Ranges for the QM Ratings (as of October 2022)
            QM Rating                    Long-Stay QM            Short-Stay QM              Overall QM
                                            Rating                   Rating                   Rating
                                          Thresholds               Thresholds               Thresholds

            ★                                155–483                 144–491                 299–975

            ★★                               484–581                 492–588                976–1,170

            ★★★                              582–663                 589–678               1,171–1,342

            ★★★★                             664–755                 679–766               1,343–1,522

            ★★★★★                           756–1,150               767–1,150              1,523–2,300
            Note: the short-stay QM rating thresholds are based on the adjusted scores (after applying the
            factor of 1,150/800 to the unadjusted scores)




9
    The unadjusted total short-stay score ranges from 100 to 800.

                                                           21
Overall Nursing Home Rating (Composite Measure)

Based on the star ratings for the health inspection domain, the staffing domain and the quality measure
domain, CMS assigns the overall Five-Star rating in three steps:

    Step 1: Start with the health inspection rating.

    Step 2: Add one star to the Step 1 result if the staffing rating is five stars; subtract one star if the
    staffing rating is one star. The overall rating cannot be more than five stars or less than one star.

    Step 3: Add one star to the Step 2 result if the quality measure rating is five stars; subtract one star if
    the quality measure rating is one star. The overall rating cannot be more than five stars or less than
    one star.

    Note: If the health inspection rating is one star, then the overall rating cannot be upgraded by more
    than one star based on the staffing and quality measure ratings.

The rationale for limiting star rating upgrades is that the staffing and quality measure domains should not
significantly outweigh the rating from actual onsite visits from trained surveyors who may have found
very serious quality of care problems. Since the health inspection rating is heavily weighted toward the
most recent findings, a health inspection rating of one star reflects both a serious and recent finding.

The method for determining the overall nursing home rating does not assign specific weights to the health
inspection, staffing, and QM domains. The health inspection rating is the most important dimension in
determining the overall rating; however, depending on the performance on the staffing and QM domains,
the overall rating for a nursing home may be increased or decreased by up to two stars.

If a nursing home has no health inspection rating, then no overall rating is assigned. If a nursing home has
no health inspection rating because it is too new to have two standard surveys, then no ratings for any
domain are displayed.

Special Focus Facilities

Nursing homes that are current participants in the Special Focus Facility (SFF) program will not be
assigned overall ratings or ratings in any domain. A yellow warning sign is displayed instead of the
overall rating and “Not Available” is displayed in place of the ratings for all other domains.

Change in Nursing Home Rating

Facilities may see a change in their overall rating for a number of reasons. Since the overall rating is
based on three individual domains, a change in any one of the domains can affect the overall rating. Any
new data for a nursing home could potentially change a star rating domain.

Health inspection rating changes: Events that could change the health inspection score include:

        •   A new health inspection.
        •   New complaint deficiencies.
        •   New focused infection control survey deficiencies.

                                                       22
        •   A second, third, or fourth revisit.
        •   Resolution of Informal Dispute Resolutions (IDR) or Independent Informal Dispute
            Resolutions (IIDR) resulting in changes to the scope and/or severity of deficiencies.
        •   The “aging” of complaint and focused infection control survey deficiencies. Another reason
            the health inspection data (and therefore the rating) for a nursing home may change is the
            “aging” of one or more complaint or focused infection control survey deficiencies.
            Specifically, these citations are assigned to a time period based on the 12-month period in
            which the complaint investigation or focused infection control survey occurred. Thus, when a
            complaint or focused infection control survey deficiency ages into a prior period, it receives
            less weight in the scoring process and thus the weighted health inspection score may change
            and be compared to the state distribution at that time.
        •   If a nursing home newly qualifies for the abuse icon, the health inspection rating is capped at
            two stars, and this may cause a change in the overall rating. Similarly, when a nursing home
            no longer qualifies for the abuse icon, the health inspection rating may change.

Health inspection data will be included as soon as they become part of the CMS database. The timing for
this can vary by state and depends on having the complete survey package for the State Survey Agency to
upload to the national database. Additional inspection data may be added to the database at any time
because of complaint investigations, outcomes of revisits, Informal Dispute Resolutions (IDR), or
Independent Informal Dispute Resolutions (IIDR). These data may not be added in the same cycle as the
standard inspection data.

Since the cut-points between star categories for the health inspection rating are based on percentile
distributions that are not fixed, those cut-points may vary slightly depending on the current nursing home
distribution in the database. However, while the cut-points for the health inspection ratings may change
from month to month, the rating for a given facility is held constant until there is a change in the weighted
health inspection score for that nursing home.

Staffing rating changes: PBJ staffing data are reported quarterly, so new staffing measures and ratings
are calculated and posted quarterly. Changes in a nursing home’s staffing measure or rating may be due to
differences in the number of hours submitted for staff, changes in the daily census, changes in resident
case-mix from the previous quarter, or changes in staff turnover. Additionally, the audit process may lead
to a change in the staffing rating for a facility.

Quality Measure rating changes: Data for the MDS-based QMs and the claims-based hospitalization and
ED visit measures are updated quarterly, and the QM rating is updated at the same time. The updates
typically occur in January, April, July, and October at the time of the Care Compare website refresh.
Changes in the quality measures may change the star ratings.




                                                     23
                                 Appendices
                                 Table A1
      Case-Mix Nursing Minutes by RUG-IV Group and Nursing Staff Type
                                   STRIVE Study Average Times (Minutes)
Major RUG      RUG-IV                            Total                      Total Nurse
 Group         Code      RN         LPN        Licensed    Nurse Aide     (RN+LPN+Aide)
               RUX      68.37      111.44       179.81       131.11          310.92
               RUL      109.06     63.87        172.93       199.94          372.87
               RVX      29.24      95.88        125.12       145.94          271.06
               RVL      67.74      97.39        165.13       139.99          305.12
Rehab Plus
               RHX      128.79     51.92        180.71       155.24          335.95
 Extensive
               RHL      67.28      48.41        115.69       135.32          251.01
               RMX      97.54      74.61        172.15       148.44          320.59
               RML      133.82     84.01        217.83       153.24          371.07
               RLX      133.82     84.01        217.83       153.24          371.07
               RUC      27.80      66.41        94.21        148.95          243.16
               RUB      45.01      71.09        116.10       141.03          257.13
               RUA      35.18      54.55        89.73        101.01          190.74
               RVC      34.22      68.45        102.67       156.53          259.20
               RVB      28.86      56.56        85.42        119.90          205.32
               RVA      31.30      59.35        90.65        113.73          204.38
               RHC      36.62      54.88        91.50        156.14          247.64
  Rehab
               RHB      36.42      47.88        84.30        119.48          203.78
               RHA      27.09      51.76        78.85        99.82           178.67
               RMC      32.58      56.05        88.63        148.87          237.50
               RMB      32.10      55.47        87.57        134.74          222.31
               RMA      25.99      48.79        74.78        98.81           173.59
               RLB      33.86      44.58        78.44        185.83          264.27
               RLA      15.46      43.58        59.04        118.93          177.97
               ES3      130.49     58.49        188.98       152.12          341.10
 Extensive
               ES2      65.19      75.23        140.42       146.65          287.07
  Services
               ES1      72.81      49.49        122.30       127.62          249.92
               HE2      21.25      67.93        89.18        190.47          279.65
               HD2      41.89      70.63        112.52       153.76          266.28
               HC2      35.13      53.63        88.76        154.72          243.48
Special Care   HB2      60.64      67.91        128.55       133.86          262.41
   High        HE1      19.20      67.73        86.93        149.47          236.40
               HD1      16.89      54.54        71.43        141.80          213.23
               HC1      22.43      54.17        76.60        135.33          211.93
               HB1      21.65      50.50        72.15        106.77          178.92

                                       24
                                 STRIVE Study Average Times (Minutes)
 Major RUG      RUG-IV                         Total                      Total Nurse
  Group         Code      RN      LPN        Licensed    Nurse Aide     (RN+LPN+Aide)
                LE2      22.16   58.83        80.99        176.15          257.14
                LD2      19.59   58.10        77.69        153.29          230.98
                LC2      27.44   47.80        75.24        116.12          191.36
Special Care    LB2      29.52   50.73        80.25        128.44          208.69
   Low          LE1      22.11   52.25        74.36        143.41          217.77
                LD1      11.78   43.94        55.72        130.80          186.52
                LC1      15.72   46.56        62.28        124.77          187.05
                LB1      18.99   48.66        67.65        106.16          173.81
                CE2      21.05   44.13        65.18        162.70          227.88
                CD2      20.01   45.17        65.18        175.51          240.69
                CC2      19.77   36.95        56.72        132.92          189.64
                CB2      23.50   36.46        59.96        114.97          174.93
  Clinically    CA2      20.69   44.63        65.32        80.92           146.24
  Complex       CE1      21.26   33.75        55.01        159.10          214.11
                CD1      15.31   41.90        57.21        151.40          208.61
                CC1      16.00   35.10        51.10        126.91          178.01
                CB1      16.17   34.99        51.16        118.45          169.61
                CA1      22.39   40.22        62.61        72.76           135.37
 Behavioral     BB2      11.30   33.26        44.56        117.96          162.52
 Symptoms       BA2      18.34   41.18        59.52        101.56          161.08
and Cognitive   BB1      14.93   32.83        47.76        114.30          162.06
Performance     BA1      13.60   31.57        45.17        86.06           131.23
                PE2      15.11   39.76        54.87        163.58          218.45
                PD2      12.09   38.01        50.10        163.38          213.48
                PC2      8.14    33.51        41.65        124.90          166.55
                PB2      15.49   38.95        54.44        118.83          173.27
 Reduced
                PA2      5.50    35.91        41.41        73.16           114.57
  Physical
Functioning     PE1      19.91   36.07        55.98        161.23          217.21
                PD1      16.18   33.58        49.76        147.31          197.07
                PC1      14.07   36.94        51.01        123.74          174.75
                PB1      12.49   31.80        44.29        95.60           139.89
                PA1      14.32   32.42        46.74        70.77           117.51




                                     25
             Table A2. Ranges for Point Values for Staffing Measures1

Staffing Measure                        Points          Min               Max
Adjusted RN Staffing (Hours per          100           1.298            Or higher
Resident per Day)                        90            0.992             1.297
                                         80            0.819             0.991
                                         70            0.692             0.818
                                         60            0.591             0.691
                                         50            0.505             0.590
                                         40            0.426             0.504
                                         30            0.352             0.425
                                         20            0.261             0.351
                                         10            0.000             0.260
Adjusted Total Nurse Staffing (Hours     100           4.954            Or higher
per Resident per Day)                    90            4.429             4.953
                                         80            4.105             4.428
                                         70            3.869             4.104
                                         60            3.653             3.868
                                         50            3.445             3.652
                                         40            3.248             3.444
                                         30            3.030             3.247
                                         20            2.747             3.029
                                         10            0.000             2.746
Adjusted Total Nurse Staffing on         50            4.328            Or higher
weekends (Hours per Resident per Day)    45            3.896             4.327
                                         40            3.623             3.895
                                         35            3.382             3.622
                                         30            3.174             3.381
                                         25            2.985             3.173
                                         20            2.810             2.984
                                         15            2.613             2.809
                                         10            2.350             2.612
                                          5            0.000             2.349

                                        26
    Staffing Measure                                   Points                  Min                  Max
    RN Turnover (%)                                      50                   0.000                24.528
                                                         45                  24.529                33.108
                                                         40                  33.109                39.623
                                                         35                  39.624                45.161
                                                         30                  45.162                49.123
                                                         25                  49.124                56.977
                                                         20                  56.978                62.963
                                                         15                  62.964                71.053
                                                         10                  71.054                81.081
                                                          5                  81.082               100.000
    Total Nurse Turnover (%)                             50                   0.000                34.416
                                                         45                  34.417                40.594
                                                         40                  40.595                44.848
                                                         35                  44.849                48.696
                                                         30                  48.697                52.353
                                                         25                  52.354                56.391
                                                         20                  56.392                60.699
                                                         15                  60.700                65.741
                                                         10                  65.742                72.678
                                                          5                  72.679               100.000
    Number of Administrator Departures                   30                     0                     0
                                                         25                     1                     1
                                                         10                     2                 Or more
1
 For all measures except for Number of Administrator Departures, these cut points are based on the national
distribution of data through 2022Q1. For the staffing level measures, the cut points are based on deciles of case-
mix adjusted staffing for 2022Q1. For the total nurse and RN turnover measures, these cut points are based on the
national distribution of turnover for calendar year 2021. As described in the specifications for the turnover
measures in this document, data from 2022Q1 is used to identify staff that left the nursing home during the last
quarter of 2021.




                                                        27
                                   Table A3
   Ranges for Point Values for Quality Measures, Using Four Quarter Average
                                 Distributions1
                                            For QM values …
           Quality Measure                                      Number of QM points is…
                                         Between…       And…
Percentage of SNF residents with          0.0000       0.0000            100
pressure ulcers/pressure injuries that    0.0001       0.0219             80
are new or worsened (short-stay)
                                          0.0220       0.0395             60
                                          0.0396       0.0647             40
                                          0.0648       1.0000             20
Rate of successful return to home and     0.6336       1.0000            150
community from a SNF (short-stay)         0.5976       0.6335            135
                                          0.5697       0.5975            120
                                          0.5453       0.5696            105
                                          0.5173       0.5452             90
                                          0.4917       0.5172             75
                                          0.4609       0.4916             60
                                          0.4262       0.4608             45
                                          0.3763       0.4261             30
                                          0.0000       0.3762             15
Percentage of residents whose need        0.0000       0.0719            150
for help with daily activities has        0.0720       0.0956            135
increased (long-stay)
                                          0.0957       0.1141            120
                                          0.1142       0.1296            105
                                          0.1297       0.1441             90
                                          0.1442       0.1589             75
                                          0.1590       0.1759             60
                                          0.1760       0.1978             45
                                          0.1979       0.2323             30
                                          0.2324       1.0000             15




                                             28
                                            For QM values …
           Quality Measure                                      Number of QM points is…
                                         Between…       And…
Percentage of residents who have/had      0.0000       0.0050            100
a catheter inserted and left in their     0.0051       0.0126             80
bladder (long-stay)
                                          0.0127       0.0217             60
                                          0.0218       0.0356             40
                                          0.0357       1.0000             20
Percentage of residents with a urinary    0.0000       0.0070            100
tract infection (long-stay)               0.0071       0.0160             80
                                          0.0161       0.0272             60
                                          0.0273       0.0452             40
                                          0.0453       1.0000             20
Percentage of residents experiencing      0.0000       0.0134            100
one or more falls with major injury       0.0135       0.0246             80
(long-stay)
                                          0.0247       0.0356             60
                                          0.0357       0.0514             40
                                          0.0515       1.0000             20
Percentage of residents who got an        0.0000       0.0478            150
antipsychotic medication (long-stay)      0.0479       0.0749            135
                                          0.0750       0.0960            120
                                          0.0961       0.1137            105
                                          0.1138       0.1321             90
                                          0.1322       0.1508             75
                                          0.1509       0.1746             60
                                          0.1747       0.2039             45
                                          0.2040       0.2538             30
                                          0.2539       1.0000             15
Percentage of residents who got           0.0000       0.0000            100
antipsychotic medication for the first    0.0001       0.0096             80
time (short-stay)
                                          0.0097       0.0168             60
                                          0.0169       0.0289             40
                                          0.0290       1.0000             20


                                             29
                                              For QM values …
           Quality Measure                                        Number of QM points is…
                                           Between…       And…
Percentage of residents whose ability       0.0000       0.0821            150
to move independently worsened              0.0822       0.1121            135
(long-stay)
                                            0.1122       0.1350            120
                                            0.1351       0.1568            105
                                            0.1569       0.1760             90
                                            0.1761       0.1955             75
                                            0.1956       0.2153             60
                                            0.2154       0.2394             45
                                            0.2395       0.2747             30
                                            0.2748       1.0000             15
Percentage of high-risk residents with      0.0000       0.0377            100
pressure ulcers (long-stay)                 0.0378       0.0584             80
                                            0.0585       0.0783             60
                                            0.0784       0.1057             40
                                            0.1058       1.0000             20
Percentage of residents who improved        0.8276       1.0000            150
in their ability to move around on their    0.7745       0.8275            135
own (short-stay)
                                            0.7365       0.7744            120
                                            0.7039       0.7364            105
                                            0.6738       0.7038             90
                                            0.6428       0.6737             75
                                            0.6091       0.6427             60
                                            0.5664       0.6090             45
                                            0.5015       0.5663             30
                                            0.0000       0.5014             15




                                               30
                                            For QM values …
           Quality Measure                                      Number of QM points is…
                                         Between…       And…
Percentage of short-stay residents who    0.0000       0.1500            150
were re-hospitalized after a nursing      0.1501       0.1770            135
home admission (short-stay)
                                          0.1771       0.1956            120
                                          0.1957       0.2115            105
                                          0.2116       0.2260             90
                                          0.2261       0.2403             75
                                          0.2404       0.2557             60
                                          0.2558       0.2743             45
                                          0.2744       0.3032             30
                                          0.3033       1.0000             15
Percentage of short-stay residents who    0.0000       0.0475            150
have had an outpatient emergency          0.0476       0.0640            135
department (ED) visit (short-stay)
                                          0.0641       0.0768            120
                                          0.0769       0.0887            105
                                          0.0888       0.1000             90
                                          0.1001       0.1124             75
                                          0.1125       0.1271             60
                                          0.1272       0.1465             45
                                          0.1466       0.1759             30
                                          0.1760       1.0000             15




                                             31
                                                   For QM values …
               Quality Measure                                                 Number of QM points is…
                                              Between…            And…
    Number of hospitalizations per 1,000         0.0000           0.8514                   150
    resident days (long-stay)                    0.8515           1.1167                   135
                                                 1.1168           1.3112                   120
                                                 1.3113           1.4931                   105
                                                 1.4932           1.6759                    90
                                                 1.6760           1.8622                    75
                                                 1.8623           2.0642                    60
                                                 2.0643           2.3236                    45
                                                 2.3237           2.7286                    30
                                                 2.7287         1000.000                    15
    Number of outpatient emergency               0.0000           0.3468                   150
    department (ED) visits per 1,000             0.3469           0.4968                   135
    resident days (long-stay)
                                                 0.4969           0.6214                   120
                                                 0.6215           0.7381                   105
                                                 0.7382           0.8749                    90
                                                 0.8750           1.0265                    75
                                                 1.0266           1.2088                    60
                                                 1.2089           1.4696                    45
                                                 1.4697           1.9080                    30
                                                 1.9081         1000.000                    15
1
 For the hospitalization and ED visit measures, points are based on data from 2017Q4–2018Q3. For MDS-based
measures except for the short-stay pressure ulcer/pressure injury measure, points are based on data from
2017Q4–2018Q3. For the short-stay pressure ulcer/pressure injury measure, points are based on data from
2019Q1–2019Q4. For the successful return to home and community from a SNF measure, points are based on data
from 2016Q4 through 2017Q3.
Having a greater number of QM points corresponds to better performance. More points are awarded for having a
lower QM rate for all measures except functional improvement and successful community discharge where higher
rates correspond to better performance.




                                                     32
